We're almost done building the first
section of our page, but what's missing is this cool
animated button that I showed you right at the beginning.
So let's go build that.
By coding up this button, you will learn techniques
that are going to be useful in countless situations
in the future.
So you're going to learn what pseudo-elements
and pseudo-classes are and why they are important.
How and why to use the after pseudo-element
and how to build a creative hover animation effect
using the transition property.
So this lecture is probably going to be rather long
but I promise you it's going to be totally worth it.
So the button that I'm talking about is this one here.
And so it has this nice effect you see
where it looks like it's getting bigger
and then in the end it fades out after like
half a second or something, you see?
So this is what we're going to build.
So it moves up a little bit and
creates this shadow beneath it
and so it looks like it's moving up
in direction to the user.
So let's check it again.
So it's like it's really moving up,
that's why the shadow then appears.
Now, look what happens when we click it,
so it goes down a little bit and the shadow also
disappears a little bit as if we were really
pushing it towards the page.
Want to see it again?
So we hover it, it elevates, and then as we click it,
it looks like it's going back down,
and you can see it because it moves down
and because the shadow gets a little bit smaller.
So you see?
There it is.
And actually moves down, but let's see it again and
there it is, right?
So let's first code up that part
where this functionality happens
and then later we're going to care about this white part
that looks like it's like flying out or something,
it's growing bigger and bigger and then disappears.
So back to our markup here,
remember that I was saying that we were going to
add something here to this text box
and what I mean is, of course, this button.
So the button will be an anchor element,
so a for now, with an href of nothing,
so leading to nothing, which is this hash symbol
and then of course, we need to give it some class,
and I'm going to call it, as usual, button,
but at the same time, I'm giving it another class,
calling button, white, because we're going to have
multiple buttons on the page, some will be white
some will be green, but most of the functionality
is the same, only the color changes and so I'm going
to put the styles about the color here in this class
and the stuff that doesn't change
from the white to the green button in this button class.
So we've done this before, at least in my other HTML course
and so this should be nothing new to you,
it's just a good practice.
Alright, and the text, which we have on this link,
on this button, is discover our tours,
just like this.
And so let's now start styling the button element down here.
So you see our CSS file is getting rather long,
we're already at 121 lines here, but don't worry,
we're going to think about architecture
and all that stuff a bit later.
So for now, in this section, we're just focusing on
getting this code ready here and
getting this header element ready
and we're going to think about organizational aspects
of our code a bit later.
So with this, we select a button element
but since it's a link, I'm sure you already know
that we should do it like this.
Alright, and what is this?
So this here is a pseudo-class, it's the link pseudo-class.
And pseudo-classes are a special state of a selector.
So this link here is a state of the button selector.
So like when a user hovers an element, or when a checkbox
is clicked or if we want to select a last-child,
and many other possibilities.
So we use pseudo-classes to style elements
under a special condition.
And it's a very important concept
that we're going to use all the time.
So the link is a special state of a selector when it is
an anchor element so it functions as a link.
But there's also the visited state.
So button visited.
So this is the state when the user has already clicked
on the button once before and then sees the button again,
so that's the visited state.
And I'm sure that you know that for example, if we don't
style a link at all, it will appear blue in the beginning
and then once we click on it once, when we see it again,
then it will be purple.
So that's the default styling of links
in most of the browsers.
Now we don't want this, we want the visited state to
look at exactly like the link state, so the normal state
of our links and so we just put them together.
Now the first thing that we're going to do is to say
that we want the text to be uppercase,
text transform uppercase.
We want there to be no text decoration.
Let's actually take a look so we can see
what exactly we want to change.
So here we go.
So we don't want, of course, this color
and we don't want this underline,
so let's get rid of it.
So, text decoration and I'm sure you
already know all of this,
that's why these properties that are not really new to you,
I'm not really explaining what they're doing, okay?
And then the text we want to be gray.
Now remember that we're going to have multiple colors
for the button and so in the white button,
the text will be this dark gray,
but in the green button, it will probably be white.
And so that's something that we have to do
in this external class.
So let me already create that actually,
so it's called button white, and so here we're going
to have a background color of white, of course,
background color, and just so I did this trick
where I just write a couple of letters and then the
text editor figures our which property I want
and this way I have to type less code.
So white as we saw already, FFF,
and the color should be 777 as we already used before.
Now we also want some padding around the button, of course,
so let's specify that as well.
And once again, I'm sure you're already familiar with how
the shortened property of padding works.
So we can specify only one value and then it will
apply everywhere, so top, bottom, left, and right
or we can also write two values.
Then the first one will be for top and bottom
and then second one will be for left and right.
So let's say 15 pixels and 40 pixels.
So now we have a padding at the top and at the bottom of
15 pixels and left and right, 40 pixels.
And we could also write four numbers.
Then the first one would be top, the second would be right,
the third one would be the bottom,
and the fourth one would be for the left side.
Okay, now check this out,
but I will tell you already that it's not going to work as
expected because it's occupying here this space
on the top of this other text where it shouldn't.
That's because it's right now, an inline element.
So this button here is right now an inline element
because it's simply text, but we should display it
as an inline block.
And this way the box model works on this element as if
was just a normal block element, okay?
So we should always do this if we want to
give some paddings or some heights
or width to elements, okay?
Now another thing that I noticed here,
let me just refresh this, so now it has its own space.
Another thing that we want is this actually here to be in
the middle of this box, right?
So how could we do that?
How could we achieve this button to be
in the center of the box?
Do you think we should use absolute positioning
or transforms like we did before?
Well I don't think so because
that would really be overkill.
It would be way to much for this very simple problem.
So this is an inline block element and
so it's treated as if it was text.
And so if it's text and we want it to be at the center
of this box, all we have to do is to set the text box,
I believe it's called.
Exactly, it's text box.
All we have to do is to set its text align property
to the center and that's it.
So now it's going to center the text
that is inside of the box, including of course, the button.
So just to be sure, yeah, here it goes.
And since we're here, let's also add here some white
space between this heading element and the button.
So how do we do white space?
Exactly, we use the margin property.
And in this case we just want margin at the bottom,
we say margin bottom and let's say we want 60 pixels.
Alright.
I'm not going to check it right now,
we're going to check it later on.
So this is link in the visited state.
Now let's take care actually of the hover state.
So button hover, so another pseudo-class to select
a different and special state of this element.
So what do we want to happen, remember?
The first thing is for this element to move up.
So how can we do that?
We use transform, such as we did before.
So you see transform is something really, really important.
It's an extremely important property that we're
using all the time to create cool and modern effects,
where elements move around or even rotate or stuff,
so transform is really important.
So now we want to translate it and we want it to move up.
So which direction is that?
X or upsilon?
And it's right, it's direction upsilon, of course.
And we want it to move up so we use a negative value
and that's because in CSS, the upsilon axis moves from
the top to the bottom, so it's like
from the top to the bottom.
And if you want to move up, we have to go the
other way around and so it's negative.
So to go up, it's a negative value.
So negative, minus three pixels in this case.
So that's for the hover.
Now when we clicked it, remember it looked a bit different.
So it's the active state remember, when we click an element
then that's called the active state.
So it's the active pseudo-class.
So remember what it looked like when we clicked it?
Again, it's a translate because again, it moved
and this time we're only moving it one pixel up.
So this one pixel up, so this minus one pixel
is in relation to the initial state, so to the link state,
not to the hover.
So it's not minus one pixel
in relation to the hover state, but
it's always here related to the initial link state, okay?
So let's check that out.
So the margin is there and we hover so it goes up.
No animation so far but it goes up
and when we click, it goes down a bit, right?
So, cool.
Now all we have to do is to animate this and then
also add these shadows.
But first let's actually add the rounded corners.
So border radius, and here we can put a really high number,
like let's say even 100 pixels or something and then
what it will do is to simply shape it like this here
on the edges.
So if you put 200 or 500 pixels,
it will all still be the same, okay?
So now all we have to do is the small animation.
So remember that in the last lecture,
I said that there are two types of animations.
The first one is to simply use the transition property,
which is the easy one, and the more complex one is
the method that we used,
which was to really specify the steps of the
animations with the keyframes at-rule.
Now in this case, that's not necessary, is all.
All we have to do is use the transition property,
transition, now we have to just specify
which properties we want to animate.
And if we're not really sure, or if we don't want to
write them out, we can simply say all.
So in this case, all the properties
are enabled to be animated.
Then we can also specify a time that we want.
Let's say that we want 0.2 seconds.
So this is already the shorthand version of the transition.
So just like before here where we had a shorthand for
animation, instead of writing out all of these properties,
we do the same with transition.
We just write all of these possibilities here in the same
property as a shorthand because it's just easier.
It's another transform on the hover as well as
on the active will be animated in relation
to their initial state.
And this is actually causes sometimes a lot of confusion
as to why the transition property
has to be on the initial state.
But that's just how it works.
So on the initial states, we say that there can be
a transition basically on all the properties
and then on the hover, so here we say, how it should
look like in the hover state and in the active state
and then the animation is going to happen.
So let's take a look at that.
And yeah, here we go.
So now it moves up and very nicely it moves down,
just like this, okay.
Now all we have to do is to add the box shadow
and this also when we do the hover.
And so in the box shadow property, we can specify
a bunch of values.
So the first one is the offset in the x direction.
And since we don't want any shadow in the x direction,
you only want it in the upsilon direction,
we put a zero here.
Now in upsilon, which is the second one, we actually
want some offset, so 10 pixels let's say.
So the shadow will be 10 pixels down.
Then the third value is the blur that we want to see.
And let's say 20 pixels so we have a really high blur here.
And this makes for a more blurry shadow
so it looks like we're further away.
And so in the active box shadow, we're then
going to reduce that blur and
then it looks like we're back closer to the page, okay?
And here now, finally, we can put a color.
So an RGBA in this case because we want the color of the
shadow to be transparent.
So here we put it to black, complete black,
and then let's just put a transparency value.
So this is black, but not completely black,
but only with 20% opacity, in order to make it
just a very subtle shadow and not all too visible.
We want it to be very subtle, okay?
Now you can play around then with different numbers
to see how it's going to look like if you make it darker,
if you make it less opaque.
20% I think is a good way to go.
Now remember, when we click on the button,
so when it's active, we want the shadow to look smaller
and so to give the impression that the button is closer
to the page and so further away from the user.
So let's decrease this here to five and then we also
want it less blurred.
So let's say 10 pixels here, okay?
So I'm doing this from my experience because I have
a lot of experience by playing around with these values
so if this looks a bit like magic to you, then don't worry,
it comes with practice.
And so again, you should just play around with these numbers
and take a look how things behave
if you change the values, okay?
Now let's just take a look.
And yeah, so you see the shadow coming up, right?
And now when we click it, it goes down like this.
So we lose a bit of shadow and it also becomes less blurry.
Just to show you how it would look like with one pixel,
for example, let's see.
So you see, there's a lot less blur now, right?
But we want a little bit of blur
to make it look more natural,
and so let's put that 10 pixel that we had before.
Okay and with that we have the
first part of the button ready.
Now to build the second part of this button,
which includes some more animation effects,
just join me right in the next lecture.